.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

# Description

<!-- CI flakiness -- delete this before opening a PR

Sadly, some CI checks are currently flaky. Right now, this includes:

 - GH Actions Windows job runs out of memory, e.g. in https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/runs/7231748864?check_suite_focus=true
 
 - The tests in WallClock.delay* can fail under load (quite rarely): https://hydra.iohk.io/build/16723452/nixlog/76

If you encounter one of these, try restarting the job to see if the failure vanishes. If it does not or when in doubt, consider posting in the #network or #consensus channels on Slack.
-->

_description of the pull request, if it fixes a particular issue it should link
the PR to a particular issue, see
[ref](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue#linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue-using-a-keyword=)_

# Checklist

- Branch
    - [ ] Commit sequence broadly makes sense
    - [ ] Commits have useful messages
    - [ ] The documentation has been properly updated
    - [ ] New tests are added if needed and existing tests are updated
    - [ ] If this branch changes Consensus and has any consequences for downstream repositories or end users, said changes must be documented in [`interface-CHANGELOG.md`](../ouroboros-consensus/docs/interface-CHANGELOG.md)
    - [ ] If this branch changes Network and has any consequences for downstream repositories or end users, said changes must be documented in [`interface-CHANGELOG.md`](../docs/interface-CHANGELOG.md)
    - [ ] If serialization changes, user-facing consequences (e.g. replay from genesis) are confirmed to be intentional.
- Pull Request
    - [ ] Self-reviewed the diff
    - [ ] Useful pull request description at least containing the following information:
      - What does this PR change?
      - Why these changes were needed?
      - How does this affect downstream repositories and/or end-users?
      - Which ticket does this PR close (if any)? If it does, is it [linked](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue)?
    - [ ] Reviewer requested

Commit message:

Implement the Consensus release process

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

# Description

<!-- CI flakiness -- delete this before opening a PR

Sadly, some CI checks are currently flaky. Right now, this includes:

 - GH Actions Windows job runs out of memory, e.g. in https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/runs/7231748864?check_suite_focus=true
 
 - The tests in WallClock.delay* can fail under load (quite rarely): https://hydra.iohk.io/build/16723452/nixlog/76

If you encounter one of these, try restarting the job to see if the failure vanishes. If it does not or when in doubt, consider posting in the #network or #consensus channels on Slack.
-->

_description of the pull request, if it fixes a particular issue it should link
the PR to a particular issue, see
[ref](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue#linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue-using-a-keyword=)_

# Checklist

- Branch
    - [ ] Commit sequence broadly makes sense
    - [ ] Commits have useful messages
    - [ ] The documentation has been properly updated
    - [ ] New tests are added if needed and existing tests are updated
    - [ ] Any changes affecting Consensus packages must have an entry in the
          appropriate `changelog.d` directory created using
          [`scriv`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/scriv). If in doubt, see
          the [Consensus release
          process](../ouroboros-consensus/docs/ReleaseProcess.md).
    - [ ] If this branch changes Network and has any consequences for downstream repositories or end users, said changes must be documented in [`interface-CHANGELOG.md`](../docs/interface-CHANGELOG.md)
    - [ ] If serialization changes, user-facing consequences (e.g. replay from genesis) are confirmed to be intentional.
- Pull Request
    - [ ] Self-reviewed the diff
    - [ ] Useful pull request description at least containing the following information:
      - What does this PR change?
      - Why these changes were needed?
      - How does this affect downstream repositories and/or end-users?
      - Which ticket does this PR close (if any)? If it does, is it [linked](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue)?
    - [ ] Reviewer requested
