The Genesis initiative for the Consensus team, from the top.

# Relevant attacks

1) "fake stake" attack (our current code already mitigates this)

  * https://medium.com/@dsl_uiuc/fake-stake-attacks-on-chain-based-proof-of-stake-cryptocurrencies-b8b05723f806

  * Adversary can send invalid blocks and still thereby cause me to waste
    enough network&compute resources on it to DoS me. (EG fetch an old state
    from disk before realizing you don't need it.)

  * Mitigation: Immediately ignore blocks that are older than `k`. Checked via
    the ~1100 byte block header. Ouroboros papers' Common Prefix theorems
    ensure this is sound for nodes that have been "caught up" for long enough.

  * (TODO Confirm.) We disconnect from peer if they send a block that doesn't
    match the header they used to convince us to download the block.

2) "long range" attacks (Genesis Paper)

  * With just Praos, the adversary can isolate any node that hasn't been
    "caught up" to `mainnet` _recently_ enough, such as an entirely fresh node,
    a node that's been offline a month, etc.

  * Current code hasn't worried about this because our deployment instructs
    people to sync from one of the IOG relays, which have forever been "caught
    up".

  * We want to shutdown the relays, which will arm the long range attack. So we
    need to mitigate directly.

  * See below for more details dynamics and the mitigation scheme.

3) "eclipse" attack (no IOG paper for this)

  * Even with Genesis, if all our peers are adversarial, we're doomed. The
    Genesis paper can kind of get away with it, because it rollsback by more
    than `k` whenever it reconnects to the honest chain. But because of our
    fake stake attack mitigation, we can't do that: we'll disconnect from peers
    offering the honest chain (the `ForksTooDeep` ChainSync outcome).

  * The P2P design strives to _prevent_ eclipses. But the Networking Team's
    plan from the start has been for Consensus to handle _detecting_ eclipses
    when the peer selection went wrong. Once detected, the plan for _escaping_
    eclipses has been to cycle our peers, starting a fresh P2P connection
    effort. Remark: if we're fundamentally eclipsed (eg at the hardware level),
    then the best we can hope for is refusing to commit to any blocks until
    we're reconnected to the honest chain. (Or just dying with an indiciative
    log message, I suppose.)

  * See below for the detection scheme.

# Mitigating long range attacks

In the Genesis paper's model, each message contains an entire chain and the
nodes are allowed to rollback more than `k` blocks; the Common Prefix theorem
doesn't apply to nodes that have been offline recently, nodes that aren't
"caught up". The Genesis paper phrases the fix as a new way to compare chains,
but I favor Edsko's phrasing focused in _prefixes_, which the researchers said
they quite liked.

The key insight is that our nodes (via ChainSync and BlockFetch) aren't really
exchanging _chains_, they're exchanging _prefixes_ of chains. One of our core
assumptions is often paraphrased as: the longest _chain_ in the system is the
honest chain. On the other hand, the longest prefix a node has received at any
given time might just be the one that node happened to receive first. Thus the
Genesis paper (via Edsko's interpretation) instead defines _prefix selection_,
which is to prefer the prefix that is denser in fixed-size window of slots that
starts just after the intersection with the competing candidate prefix --
called _the (comparison's) Genesis window_.

> Given a large enough window starting at two chain's intersection, the honest
chain should always be densest, for effectively the same reasons that the
honest chain should always be longest in the system.

Prefix selection alone doesn't prevent long range attacks, though, since
there's no guarantee that a node has even been sent an honest prefix! For that
concern, we've decided to play a numbers game: trust in the P2P peer selection
algorithm insofar as to assume that if we have ~20 peers, then at least one of
them is feeding us (prefixes of) the honest chain. If that's not true, then
we've been eclipsed (likely a botnet attack).

## Another reason the intersection matters

The above prefix selection perspective on the Genesis rule is particularly
pertinent for our code because our actual node, in contrast to the the model in
the papers, exchanges blocks at a time instead of whole chains, and hence, when
(re)joining, is comparing prefixes until catches back up to `mainnet`. However,
even if we did (somehow!) exchange entire chains, the Genesis rule is still
necessary.

Given enough wallclock time and enough legitimate leadership opportunities, an
adversary could craft a chain (TODO eg via brute-force search/grinding?) that
allots them a larger and larger share of the active slots. In various ways,
such a chain could actually become longer than the honest chain. That would not
fool the Genesis rule, though, since such a chain would be comparatively sparse
immediately after the intersection, because the Genesis window is so short that
the adversary would not have enough elections to manipulate the leader schedule
within it.

In summary, without the Genesis rule, total chain length might be an
apples-to-oranges, since, for historical chains the adversary has had
sufficient wallclock time and leadership opporutnities to manipulate the chain
that consists only of their blocks. On the other hand, the Genesis rule's
density comparison in the Genesis window after an intersection is an
apples-to-apples comparison.

## The Genesis state machine

Therefore the implementation sketch is a new top-level state machine.

* Start in Connecting.

* Connecting - never advances the immutable tip. Transition to Syncing once
  connected to enough peers.

* Syncing - runs prefix selection, which advances the immutable tip only when
  all peers have given enough headers to reveal which successor of the
  immutable tip is part of the densest in the corresponding Genesis window.
  Transition to CaughtUp once all of peers have sent their best headers and the
  node has selected one of the corresponding chains.

* CaughtUp - runs Praos as usual, ie simply selects the longest prefix (which
  is safe to consider as a full chain, not just a prefix, for a node that is
  indeed "caught up"). (TODO mention the need for new BlockFetch download
  decision logic: because we're no longer connected to at least one relay, we
  may need to allocate our download capacity more carefully; cf Tse paper
  https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1545)

## Prefix selection

The prefix selection rule, used in Syncing, is rigorously defined as follows.
Given a set of prefixes S (ie the latest (valid) headers received from peers
via ChainSync), find the least `j` such that `Anchor_{j+1} = Anchor_j` and
select an arbitrary element of `Bests_j` truncated so that it extends
`Anchor_j` by no more than `k` blocks. (TODO hmm, indeed arbitrary among
`Bests_j`? Maybe truncate them all and then apply Praos chain selection? Which
could be implemented as truncate them all before passing them as options to
BlockFetch, except for blocks I meant (which currently circumvent BlockFetch).)

```
    Anchor_0 = intersection(S)

Candidates_i = subset of S that extends Anchor_i

     Bests_i = the (necessarily non-empty) subset of Candidates_i
               whose density in the Genesis window starting at Anchor_i
               could be the greatest
               if some headers extending the element were to suddenly arrive

Anchor_{i+1} = intersection(Bests_i)
```

The definition of `Bests_i` has some subtleties. In particular, if some element
of `Bests_i` has a header that is at the end of or even beyond the Genesis
window starting at `Anchor_i`, then that element has a fixed density in that
window, since any new header extending the element would be outside of the
Genesis window. If the element's tip occurs earlier within the window, then
technically one extending header could arrive in each remaining slot in the
window. So the maximum possible density for an element of `Bests_i` is
conservatively defined as the number of its headers in the window plus the
number of slots after its last header in the window.

As our Syncing progress reaches the tip of the peers' chains, though, our peers
will begin informing us that they have no additional headers. This scenario is
converging on Praos's domain, since we actually have the peer's whole (header)
chain itself, not just a prefix of it (TODO unless they're also syncing!). Thus
we have the following refined definition.

```
    Cutoff_i = the minimum count of
               headers in the Genesis window starting at Anchor_i
               for any element of Candidates_i

     Bests_i = the (necessarily non-empty) subset of Candidates_i
               containing each prefix for which
               the count of headers in the Genesis window starting at Anchor_i
               plus the count of slots that are
                   in the Genesis window starting at Anchor_i
                   > the slot of the prefix's tip
                   and <= the slot of the peer's claimed tip
               is >= Cutoff_i

TODO would it be clearer to map each prefix-and-claimed-tip pair to an interval
[#headers in window, min(anchor+s, claimed tip) - #empty slots in window older
than a header] and keep only those prefixes whose upper bound is >= the overall
minimum lower bound?

```

Intuitively, an inferior candidate prefix is eliminated from consideration (and
thereby stops holding back `Anchor_j`) in one of two ways. Either that chain
ends in the window (while the better chains don't) or else the node eventually
receives enough of each prefix in the window to see that the number of
remaining slots in the window for this sparse prefix is too small for the
prefix to ever be able to catch up to the greatest number of received headers
in the window on whichever prefix has the most.

TODO the above is sound as a description of overall chain selection. But if
we're going to leave the logic in the ChainDB untouched (ie select the longest
path in the VolDB), as we had hoped to do, then we won't be able to prevent the
node from immediately selecting a block it just forged. Which is a problem.
However we resolve that impedance mismatch might have similarities with
Deferred Validation (being able to judge (speculatively) and propagate a block
we haven't yet validated).

It's a notable special case that Genesis prefix selection selects nearly as
aggressively as does Praos chain selection when all peers are offering the same
chain. The only delay is waiting for every peer to give us enough headers
instead of just the one. TODO Mention the jumping optimization idea.

## A new DoS vector in Syncing

While we're in the Syncing state, an adversarial peer could claim their tip is
at or beyond the Genesis window (even if they don't have such a header). This
would maximize the count of remaining slots in their Genesis window, which
vastly increases the chance that their chain remains in the `Bests` set, which
in turn causes `Anchor_j` to be shorter than it could have been. They would
thus prevent a syncing node from selecting any more of the honest chain, since
prefix selection wouldn't be able to choose between their offering and the
honest chain.

* Their selection has a low block count, but a high number of remaining slots.

* The honest chain has a much higher block count, but a low number of remaining
  slots.

* Since both are about the lowest options block count, both will remain in
  `Bests`.

For this reason, while in Syncing, a node must require that the headers sent by
each peer improve over time. EG on average (ie leaky token bucket), every 10
seconds or so they have sent a header with a higher block number than any they
had sent before. If a peer can't even maintain that average for ~1100 byte
messages, then they're probably not actually sending me a real historical chain
(ie one that does not require any ChainSync `MsgRollback`s). Or their network
connection is so poor that I should replace them with a new peer anyway.

# Eclipse detection

That description of constitutes the expected path through the Genesis state
machine for a (re)joining node, but there are other paths as well. If at any
moment we detect an eclipse (see below), we transition back to Connecting as an
attempt to escape. (TODO Maybe we need to check for eclipse before transition
to CaughtUp so that a node that is fully eclipsed won't only try to escape once
ever and then just give up?)

The rule that triggers this transition has non-trivial consequences.

## Total versus active stake

There's an important distinction to start with.

> _Total stake_ is all stake registered on the chain. _Active stake_ is the
  stake held by CaughtUp block-producing nodes.

The Shelley leadership schedule randomly distributes leadership opportunities
according to total stake, such that there's an active slot (ie slot with >0
leaders) on average once per 20 slots (ie a Geometric distribution). But only
the holders of active stake will actually mint blocks in the slots they lead.
(Technically, a node could mint a "late" block sometime after its labeled slot,
but honest nodes aren't supposed to do that.)

The underlying Ouroboros assumption is that, at all times, the _active_ stake
is dominated by the honest stakeholders (ie the honest stakeholders, with
properly configured nodes, that remain in CaughtUp enough of the time, and so
on). If that's always true, then (prefixes of) the honest chain will win every
density comparison forever.

## Detection scenarios

If I'm eclipsed, then I won't see (prefixes of) the honest chain. How can I
notice? We consider two cases.

* For a fresh node that's joining the network for the first time -- one that
  was never before CaughtUp -- the only hope for detecting eclipse is for the
  chain you're fed to be objectively too sparse. EG a chain that has blocks in
  less than 40% of the active slots that that chain's ledger states' leadership
  schedules identify as active. But this rule would backfire catastrophically
  if Cardano mainnet ever reached (near) that threshold, thus this rule would
  be introducing a new failure mode if enough honest stakeholders gave up
  Cardano (without unregistering their stake) even in the absence of an
  adversary.

* For a node that's rejoining the network, there's another option, since it
  already has selected a prefix of the (presumably) honest chain. If we were to
  become eclipsed by an adversary, which can never have more than half of the
  active stake, then -- given a "long enough" slot interval on either side --
  we should see a portion of our recent chain when the density plummeted.

We could instead collapse those two by defining the density up to the genesis
block to be two times whatever the absolute cutoff is. So I'll only discuss the
rejoining case from now on.

## Balancing false positives and missed alarms

The key challenge is false positives -- a node wrongly concluding it's
eclipsed. This possibility is unavoidable, since we're working with partial
information, much of which is random. As a drastic example: there is a
probability that some epoch has no active slots, an empty leader schedule! That
probability is astronomically small, but not zero. So we have to balance the
sensitivity of our detection against its robustness, false alarms versus missed
alarms. TODO also its promptness: we'd ideally detect an eclipse sooner rather
than later... is a slow alarm just a partially/temporarily missed alarm?

We can't judge that balance well without understanding the costs of each.

* A missed alarm means some nodes were eclipsed and did not notice. In this
  case the eclipsed nodes suffer the direct consequence, such as selling a
  yacht without receiving payment on the honest chain.

  The network as a whole wouldn't really notice the absence of a few nodes'
  stake, which is inactive while they're eclipsed. On the other hand, it could
  be distastrous if a large portion of the network were eclipsed simultaneously
  for an appreciable duration/frequency/duty cycle (eg by a botnet saturating
  our P2P peer selections).

* A false alarm means that a node concluded it is eclipsed even though it
  wasn't. The direct consequence is that the node leaves CaughtUp and goes back
  to Connecting. If we put enough defensive mechanisms in place in Connecting
  and Syncing (mostly timeouts), then such a (non-eclipsed!) node will take at
  most a few minutes to return to CaughtUp (each false alarm).

  A node in Connecting or Syncing is more likely to waste its leadership
  opportunities by minting blocks that do not extend the best chain in the
  network. This is because no growth (in Connecting) and Genesis prefix
  selection (in Syncing) is slower to select that chain than is Praos chain
  selection (in CaughtUp).

  Again, the network as a whole wouldn't notice the absence of a few nodes'
  stake, but it would be disastrous if the adversary could induce false alarms
  in significant portions of the honest stake with appreciable
  duration/frequency/duty cycle.

## Why Genesis prefix selection can be slower than Praos chain selection

It was decided the node should still mint blocks when in Connecting and
Syncing. Any honest nodes minting stale blocks (creating several short forks)
could slightly help the adversary create alternative chains, but the risk of
many honest nodes skipping many slots they could have created a competitive is
more dangerous. If a node leaves CaughtUp just before the slot it leads, then
it will likely mint the same block it would have minted in CaughtUp. There are
two subtleties.

* In that case of such lucky timing, the node won't select the block it just
  minted! Because doing so would advance its immutable tip, which is never
  allowed in Connecting and only allowed in Syncing when all of our peers
  similarly advance their immutable tip. TODO Note that Deferred Validation
  would let us propagate our minted block without having selected it! If all
  our peers select it, then we could too, even in Syncing. TODO Would DV be
  able to thereby unclog the network if all honest nodes were in Syncing? I
  think so, unless a peer of ours has a Syncing peer that branches off `k`
  before our minted block?

* If we were in Connecting or Syncing for a while before leading, it's possible
  that our minted block will not be competitive, since our selection may have
  become conservative (eg truncated to a `k`-extension of `Anchor_j`).

## The eclipse detection rule

TODO look for a recent drop in density

TODO if "recent" is too short of a duration, it's not enough coin tosses to be
robust: the false alarm rate will be too high

TODO if "recent" is too long of a duration, then we won't detect eclipses very
quickly

TODO False alarms may harm the eclipsed node because it might mint a
non-competitive block. If that happens to too many nodes/too often, then it
lowers the honest chain growth.

TODO Missed alarms harm the eclipsed node, because 1) it mints non-competitve
blocks while eclipsed and 2) the table of settlement times are misleading during
an eclipse (eg a yacht merchant could get bamboozled). If an eclipse lasts long
enough, then the node can't rejoin the honest network without intervention. If
too many nodes are eclipsed at once (or for so long they can't recover). If that
happens to too many nodes/too often, then it lowers the honest chain growth.

TODO False alarms inherently cause harm in the absence of attacks, but might
potentially be easy enough for an adversary to trigger that they become an
attack vector of their own!

# BlockFetch in CaughtUp

TODO download capacity could be a limiting factor: so which blocks to download
when faced with competing chains? The Tse paper
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1545 says to download blocks along the chain with
the freshest block.

TODO The current code does a hybrid of prefering the longest blocks offered by
the peers that are most likely to be able to send us all the requested blocks
within two slots (magic number!).

TODO We discussed this with the researchers and Alex proposed a couple options,
but then they found the Tse paper and we seem to all think that rule is sound.
Something like: if you purposely withhold the block I want, you can only do
that so long, since someone else will forge a new most desirable block soon
enough.

TODO What do I do once I have that freshest block? How do I spend my excess
download capacity? Favor the second-freshest block? Favor any chains that are
longer than the freshest block? Something else?
