# Onboarding to the Consensus Team

The content in this file should help orient a new contributor to the Consensus
Layer: its fundamental purpose and its neighboring components.

Please open PRs to add particularly useful content here. Though we would like
the file to remain as approachable as possible, therefore small and
narrowly-scoped.

## Very High-Level Motivation

At a very high level, a net of Cardano nodes should exhibit the following
concrete behaviors.

  * The net should diffuse transactions throughout the net as rapidly as
    possible.

  * The net should diffuse blocks through the net as rapidly as possible.

  * Whenever the Ouroboros protocol specifies that (a stake pool operating) a
    particular node should lead, that node should extend the best chain it has
    seen so far by minting a new block, which should contain as many
    transactions as possible.

  * The net should be very difficult to disrupt. For example, a successful
    denial of service attack should be prohibitively expensive to enact.

The primary data are _blocks_ and _transactions_. The possible contents of both
of those are primarily constrained by the ledger rules. The Consensus Layer and
Network Layer together implement a _filtering forwarding network_. Specifically,
the Consensus Layer determines which blocks propagate between neighboring nodes:
those on the _best_ chain. The IOHK researchers have established that the
Ouroboros protocol can be used to ensure that -- unless an adversary controls
more than half of the net's stake -- the honest nodes will all continually reach
_consensus_ regarding the selection of a single best chain and that that chain
grows over time.

The Consensus Layer defines with the core Consensus components and logic,
notably the Ouroboros protocol.

## The Neighbors of Consensus

The Consensus Layer integrates the Consensus core with the Network Layer and the
ledger rules. We therefore work closely with the Network Team and the Ledger
Team.

The Network Layer is also defined in this repository. It manages the nodes'
connections to its neighbors. So it ultimately provides communication channels
to the Consensus Layer, while the Consensus Layer reports back to it if a
neighbor has misbehaved etc. The Network Layer also provides the library used to
define the Consensus Layer's _client_ and _server_ state machines that let each
connected pair of nodes exchange messages according to the various _mini
protocols_ (cf `typed-protocols` package).

The ledger rules are defined in
https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-ledger-specs. The Consensus Layer
uses the ledger to validate blocks and transactions and apply them in order to
maintain _the ledger state_. The Consensus Layer in turn needs the ledger state
in order to determine when a node is allowed to mint a block, ie the _leader
schedule_.

The primary use of the Consensus Layer is the
https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-node. This is what IOHK actually
deploys on the live Cardano mainnet. Such a node runs the full Ouroboros
protocol and mints new blocks. Secondary uses include
https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-wallet and
https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-db-sync, which connect to a proper
node and only follow and _trust_ its chain selection. For example, these uses
involve problem-specific queries of the latest ledger state.

## Design Documents

The following artifacts influence and/or describe the Consensus implementation.

  * From IOHK researchers:

      * Ouroboros BFT https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/ouroboros-bfta-simple-byzantine-fault-tolerant-consensus-protocol/

      * Ouroboros Praos https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/ouroboros-praosan-adaptively-securesemi-synchronous-proof-of-stake-protocol/

      * Ouroboros Genesis https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/ouroboros-genesiscomposable-proof-of-stake-blockchains-with-dynamic-availability/

      * Internal notes, on the IOHK Google Docs

  * The ledger specifications, cf https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-ledger-specs/blob/master/README.md, especially:

      * "Shelley design specification" -> "Design Specification for Delegation
        and Incentives in Cardano" (as of this line's latest commit)

      * "Shelley ledger formal specification" -> "A Formal Specification of the
        Cardano Ledger" (as of this line's latest commit)

      * "Byron chain specification" -> "Specification of the Blockchain Layer"
        (as of this line's latest commit)

      * "Byron ledger specification" -> "A Formal Specification of the Cardano
        Ledger (for the Byron release)" (as of this line's latest commit)

  * Documents and presentations linked in this repository's
    https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/README.md, especially:

      * "Introduction to the design of Data Diffusion and Networking of Cardano
        Shelley"

      * "The Cardano Consensus (and Storage Layer)" (aka "The Consensus Report")

  * Large comments, for example in these modules. This list is a continual work
    in progress -- if you find some comment to be particularly illuminating,
    please open a PR adding it here.

      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Util.ResourceRegistry`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.HeaderValidation`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Mempool.API`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Forecast`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.HardFork.History.EraParams`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.HardFork.History.Qry`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.HardFork.History.Summary`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Protocol.Abstract`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Storage.ChainDB.API`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Storage.ChainDB.Impl.ChainSel`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.Storage.ChainDB.Impl.Iterator`
      * `Ouroboros.Network.AnchoredFragment`
      * `Ouroboros.Consensus.MiniProtocol.ChainSync.Client`
      * `Ouroboros.Network.BlockFetch.Decision`
      * `Network.TypedProtocol.Core`

  * CI-built Haddock, at https://input-output-hk.github.io/ouroboros-network/

  * IOHK media:

      * https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2017/11/03/writing-a-high-assurance-blockchain-implementation/

      * https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2018/06/04/semi-formal-development-the-cardano-wallet/

      * 2018 August wallet video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6VWCB0_uLLw

      * https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2020/05/07/combinator-makes-easy-work-of-shelley-hard-fork/

      * 2020 July hard fork combinator presentation at Cardano2020, on YouTube
        [part 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8OTZULEsaI) and [part 2](
        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wNZq6VPLIXg)

      * https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2020/05/28/the-abstract-nature-of-the-consensus-layer/

## More Guidance

See
https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/ouroboros-consensus/docs/Contributing.md
and as usual the
https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/ouroboros-consensus/README.md
file.
