### Breaking

- Initial release of the `cardano-diffusion` package, which is based on
  `ourorboros-network:cardano-diffusion` with the following modifications:
  - Removed `Cardano.Network.Types` module. `LedgerStateJudgement` is available
    from the `cardano-diffusion:api` package in
    `Cardano.Network.LedgerStateJudgement` module. `NumberOfBigLedgerPeers` is
    available from `cardano-diffusion` in `Cardano.Network.PeerSelection` module.
  - Added `Cardano.Network.PeerSelection` module, which exports most of the
    Cardano-related `PeerSelection` APIs - you can simplify your imports with it.
    It might be a good idea to import this module qualified.

- `Cardano.Network.FetchMode` exports `ConsensusMode` and
  `LedgerStateJudgement` as these are arguments of `mkReadFetchMode`.

- `Cardano.Network.Types` module was removed.  `LedgerStateJudgement` is
   available from the `cardano-diffusion:api` package in
   `Cardano.Network.LedgerStateJudgement` module. `NumberOfBigLedgerPeers` is
   available from `cardano-diffusion` in `Cardano.Network.PeerSelection` module.

- `Cardano.Network.PeerSelection.PeerSelectionActions.requestPublicRootPeers`
   was renamed as `requestPublicRootPeersImpl` to avoid a name clash with
   `PeerSelectionActions{requestPublicRootPeers}`.

- `Cardano.Network.LedgerPeerConsensusInterface` re-exports `FetchMode`,
  `LedgerStateJudgement` and `OutboundConnectionsState` since these types are
  appear in `LedgerPeerConsensusInterface` record.

- `Cardano.Network.PeerSelection.Churn` exports `PeerChurnArgs` for the
   completeness sake.
