3836/3836.md, before:

# Issue #3836: Inspect use of `error`

https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/issues/3836

We began this work by branching at `77b54c71ca67a759f82872791749fea549ee3bc7`,
committed 18 August 2023.


## Enumerating Files of Interest

Per Mark's advice, I have classified files into two tiers.

The first tier consists of files in the following packages, excluding those used
in testing within those packages:
- `ouroboros-network`
- `ouroboros-network-api`
- `ouroboros-network-protocols`
- `ouroboros-network-framework`

The second tier consists of files in the following packages, excluding those
used in testing within those packages: 
- `cardano-client`
- `cardano-ping`
- `monoidal-synchronisation`
- `network-mux`
- `ntp-client`
- `ouroboros-network-mock`
- `ouroboros-network-testing`

For the moment, we are not focusing on uses of `error` in testing files within
these packages. We consider `error` to be more plausibly useful in testing than
in production code, and its removal to be less necessary. If need be, we can
create a third tier of files consisting of those used in testing across all
packages.

Enumeration of these files is done via the included shell script, `files.sh`.
Its usage is `files.sh (1|2)`, and it prints the location of all calls to error
in the files comprising the command-line-specified tier. It finds these
locations via lightweight semantic analysis (read: `grep`).


## Tier 1

Tier 1 files contain 17 uses of `error`.

### 1: `ouroboros-network/demo/chain-sync.hs:577`
```hs
nextState [] = error "chainSyncServer: impossible"
```


### 2: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/Governor/Types.hs:674`
```hs
error $ "A pick policy requested an attribute for peer address "
```


### 3: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/Governor.hs:544`
```hs
error "peerSelectionGovernorLoop: impossible: nothing to do"
```


### 4: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/RootPeersDNS.hs:217`
```hs
Nothing  -> error "localRootPeersProvider: impossible happened"
```


### 5: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/PeerMetric.hs:387`
```hs
Nothing -> error "impossible empty pq"
```


### 6: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/BlockFetch/ClientRegistry.hs:301`
```hs
unless ok $ error "setFetchClientContext: called more than once"
```


### 7: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/Diffusion/P2P.hs:296`
```hs
error ("socketAddressType: unexpected address " ++ show addr)
```


### 8: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/KeepAlive.hs:103`
```hs
Quiesce   -> error "keepAlive: impossible happened"
```


### 9: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/TxSubmission/Outbound.hs:142`
```hs
(Nothing, TokNonBlocking) -> error "txSubmissionOutbound: impossible happend!"
```


### 10: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/TxSubmission/Outbound.hs:163`
```hs
Nothing -> error "txSubmissionOutbound: empty transaction's list"
```


### 11: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/PeerSharing.hs:91`
```hs
encodeRemoteAddress (SockAddrUnix _) = error "Should never be encoding a SockAddrUnix!"
```


### 12: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/AnchoredSeq.hs:810`
```hs
fromMaybe (error "could not join sequences") $
```


### 13: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/NodeToNode/Version.hs:174`
```hs
_ -> error "decodeTerm: impossible happened!",
```


### 14: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/AnchoredFragment.hs:165`
```hs
anchorFromPoint GenesisPoint _     = error "anchorFromPoint: genesis point"
```


### 15: `ouroboros-network-framework/src/Ouroboros/Network/Protocol/Handshake/Version.hs:73`
```hs
[] -> error "foldMapVersions: precondition violated"
```


### 16: `ouroboros-network-framework/src/Ouroboros/Network/Snocket.hs:543`
```hs
toLocalAddress _                   = error "localSnocket.toLocalAddr: impossible happened"
```


### 17: `ouroboros-network-framework/src/Ouroboros/Network/Channel.hs:231`
```hs
if full then error failureMsg
```


## Tier 2

Tier 2 files contain 11 uses of `error`.

### 1: `cardano-ping/src/Cardano/Network/Ping.hs:183`
```hs
handshakeReqEnc [] _ = error "null version list"
```


### 2: `network-mux/src/Network/Mux/DeltaQ/TraceStats.hs:37`
```hs
Nothing -> error "step: missing referenceTimePoint"
```


### 3: `network-mux/src/Network/Mux/DeltaQ/TraceStats.hs:253`
```hs
= error "Infeasible sampleInterval"
```


### 4: `network-mux/src/Network/Mux/Ingress.hs:185`
```hs
Nothing -> error ("setupDispatchTable: missing " ++ show miniProtocolNum)
```


### 5: `ntp-client/src/Network/NTP/Client.hs:105`
```hs
Right NtpSyncPending -> error "ntpClientThread: impossible happened"
```


### 6: `ouroboros-network-mock/src/Ouroboros/Network/Mock/ConcreteBlock.hs:222`
```hs
partialField n = error ("mkPartialBlock: you didn't fill in field " ++ n)
```


### 7: `ouroboros-network-mock/src/Ouroboros/Network/Mock/Chain.hs:235`
```hs
go _ = error "successorBlock: point not on chain"
```


### 8: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Script.hs:221`
```hs
= error "interpretPickScript: given empty map to pick from"
```


### 9: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Script.hs:223`
```hs
= error "interpretPickScript: given invalid pickNum"
```


### 10: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Signal.hs:251`
```hs
linger = error "TODO: Signal.linger"
```


### 11: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Signal.hs:305`
```hs
until _ = error "TODO: Signal.until"
```

Commit message:

errors: document chain-sync fix

3836/3836.md, after:

# Issue #3836: Inspect use of `error`

https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/issues/3836

We began this work by branching at `77b54c71ca67a759f82872791749fea549ee3bc7`,
committed 18 August 2023.


## Enumerating Files of Interest

Per Mark's advice, I have classified files into two tiers.

The first tier consists of files in the following packages, excluding those used
in testing within those packages:
- `ouroboros-network`
- `ouroboros-network-api`
- `ouroboros-network-protocols`
- `ouroboros-network-framework`

The second tier consists of files in the following packages, excluding those
used in testing within those packages: 
- `cardano-client`
- `cardano-ping`
- `monoidal-synchronisation`
- `network-mux`
- `ntp-client`
- `ouroboros-network-mock`
- `ouroboros-network-testing`

For the moment, we are not focusing on uses of `error` in testing files within
these packages. We consider `error` to be more plausibly useful in testing than
in production code, and its removal to be less necessary. If need be, we can
create a third tier of files consisting of those used in testing across all
packages.

Enumeration of these files is done via the included shell script, `files.sh`.
Its usage is `files.sh (1|2)`, and it prints the location of all calls to error
in the files comprising the command-line-specified tier. It finds these
locations via lightweight semantic analysis (read: `grep`).


## Tier 1

Tier 1 files contain 17 uses of `error`.

### 1: `ouroboros-network/demo/chain-sync.hs:577`
```hs
nextState [] = error "chainSyncServer: impossible"
```

The list on which `nextState` is called originates from `chainGenerator` in the
same file. `nextState` will never see an empty list because `chainGenerator`
creates an infinite list.

As one possible fix, I've replaced the error message with a more informative
one.

As another, I've lifted the `chainGenerator` result into an `Infinite`
construction, courtesy of
[`infinite-list`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/infinite-list-0.1/docs/Data-List-Infinite.html).
If this is too much, the commit introducing it (`1189f40e`) can be reverted.


### 2: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/Governor/Types.hs:674`
```hs
error $ "A pick policy requested an attribute for peer address "
```


### 3: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/Governor.hs:544`
```hs
error "peerSelectionGovernorLoop: impossible: nothing to do"
```


### 4: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/RootPeersDNS.hs:217`
```hs
Nothing  -> error "localRootPeersProvider: impossible happened"
```


### 5: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/PeerMetric.hs:387`
```hs
Nothing -> error "impossible empty pq"
```


### 6: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/BlockFetch/ClientRegistry.hs:301`
```hs
unless ok $ error "setFetchClientContext: called more than once"
```


### 7: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/Diffusion/P2P.hs:296`
```hs
error ("socketAddressType: unexpected address " ++ show addr)
```


### 8: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/KeepAlive.hs:103`
```hs
Quiesce   -> error "keepAlive: impossible happened"
```


### 9: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/TxSubmission/Outbound.hs:142`
```hs
(Nothing, TokNonBlocking) -> error "txSubmissionOutbound: impossible happend!"
```


### 10: `ouroboros-network/src/Ouroboros/Network/TxSubmission/Outbound.hs:163`
```hs
Nothing -> error "txSubmissionOutbound: empty transaction's list"
```


### 11: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/PeerSelection/PeerSharing.hs:91`
```hs
encodeRemoteAddress (SockAddrUnix _) = error "Should never be encoding a SockAddrUnix!"
```


### 12: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/AnchoredSeq.hs:810`
```hs
fromMaybe (error "could not join sequences") $
```


### 13: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/NodeToNode/Version.hs:174`
```hs
_ -> error "decodeTerm: impossible happened!",
```


### 14: `ouroboros-network-api/src/Ouroboros/Network/AnchoredFragment.hs:165`
```hs
anchorFromPoint GenesisPoint _     = error "anchorFromPoint: genesis point"
```


### 15: `ouroboros-network-framework/src/Ouroboros/Network/Protocol/Handshake/Version.hs:73`
```hs
[] -> error "foldMapVersions: precondition violated"
```


### 16: `ouroboros-network-framework/src/Ouroboros/Network/Snocket.hs:543`
```hs
toLocalAddress _                   = error "localSnocket.toLocalAddr: impossible happened"
```


### 17: `ouroboros-network-framework/src/Ouroboros/Network/Channel.hs:231`
```hs
if full then error failureMsg
```


## Tier 2

Tier 2 files contain 11 uses of `error`.

### 1: `cardano-ping/src/Cardano/Network/Ping.hs:183`
```hs
handshakeReqEnc [] _ = error "null version list"
```


### 2: `network-mux/src/Network/Mux/DeltaQ/TraceStats.hs:37`
```hs
Nothing -> error "step: missing referenceTimePoint"
```


### 3: `network-mux/src/Network/Mux/DeltaQ/TraceStats.hs:253`
```hs
= error "Infeasible sampleInterval"
```


### 4: `network-mux/src/Network/Mux/Ingress.hs:185`
```hs
Nothing -> error ("setupDispatchTable: missing " ++ show miniProtocolNum)
```


### 5: `ntp-client/src/Network/NTP/Client.hs:105`
```hs
Right NtpSyncPending -> error "ntpClientThread: impossible happened"
```


### 6: `ouroboros-network-mock/src/Ouroboros/Network/Mock/ConcreteBlock.hs:222`
```hs
partialField n = error ("mkPartialBlock: you didn't fill in field " ++ n)
```


### 7: `ouroboros-network-mock/src/Ouroboros/Network/Mock/Chain.hs:235`
```hs
go _ = error "successorBlock: point not on chain"
```


### 8: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Script.hs:221`
```hs
= error "interpretPickScript: given empty map to pick from"
```


### 9: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Script.hs:223`
```hs
= error "interpretPickScript: given invalid pickNum"
```


### 10: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Signal.hs:251`
```hs
linger = error "TODO: Signal.linger"
```


### 11: `ouroboros-network-testing/src/Ouroboros/Network/Testing/Data/Signal.hs:305`
```hs
until _ = error "TODO: Signal.until"
```
